Wheat, maize, and rice together are the most important crops cultivated in the world. They are reported to supply about 42.5% of calories and 37% of protein consumed by the world’s population (Timothy, Graeme, & Gordon, 2016). Out of these three major crops, wheat is a principal source of calories, second only to rice and also superior to maize and rice in terms of protein intake in low- and middle-income countries (CGIAR, 2021). The total utilization of wheat in 2012 and 2022 is expected to reach 779 million tons, and its consumption has been on the rise as the global population increases (FAO, 2021). Wheat has been utilized mainly as flour in a large variety of food products such as breads, cookies, and pastas. There are large differences in composition and processing quality among its cultivars, consequently influencing the quality attributes of end products. Therefore, hard wheat flours with a high level of protein such as hard red spring wheats are used in yeast-leavened baked goods due to their excellent bread-making properties. On the other hand, soft wheats low in gluten and water absorption ability are appropriate for chemically-leavened products such as cakes and cookies due to a wide range of textures from soft to brittle (Hoseney, 1986). In addition, pastas that belong to unleavened wheat products are generally made from durum wheats. Since wheat flour quality may vary depending on such various factors as climate changes, crop diseases, and other cultivation conditions (Faraji, 2011), wheat flours have been often blended to maintain the consistent quality attributes of wheat flours. From a crop breeding point of view, it is very important to identify the suitable applications of newly developed what flour varieties. Wheat classification is therefore very critical in wheat milling and food manufacturers in terms of processing performance and end-product quality. There are several preceding studies that classified wheat grain varieties based on several criteria such as the structural changes of arabinoxylans by endoxylanase (Ordaz-Ortiz, Devaux, & Saulnier, 2005) and near-infrared reflectance spectra (Delwiche & Massie, 1996). However, there is still a need to search for an alternative methodology for wheat classification due to costs, availability, and performance.
Among the various end-products of wheat flour, bread is considered to be the most prominent staple food for most of the global population, and wheat production for bread accounts for 95% of the global wheat production (Tadesse, Bishaw, & Assefa, 2019). It is well recognized that volume is one of the critical quality attributes of bread that affect consumer preference. It is the reason why a hard type of wheat that has a high level of gluten for volume expansion is appropriate for making bread among the various wheat classes. There are several preceding studies that involve the relationships between wheat flour qualities and bread loaf volume. Janssen, Van Vliet, & Vereijken (1996) provided rheological information in order to obtain a high bread loaf volume in terms of biaxial strain hardening and extensibility. Borla, Motta, Saiz, & Fritz (2004) also investigated the relationship between the protein content of wheat flour and bread volume, which showed a positive correlation. However, their primary research focus was placed on the effect of a single wheat flour feature on the bread volume, even though there are a number of determinants derived from the compositions and processing performance of wheat flours. Rózylo & Laskowski (2011) tried to predict the bread loaf volume based on flour and dough properties using a statistical regression model, and Karki, Glover, Bondalapati, & Krishnan (2016) recently utilized a weather data-based neural work model for predicting bread volume. However, the number of samples was limited and the correlation of determinations (R2 < 0.77) was not high enough. Therefore, it is necessary to take into account a more thorough analysis that incorporates multivariables for more accurately predicting the bread loaf volume.
Machine learning is a computational technique to provide computer systems with the ability to learn (Hügle, Omoumi, van Laar, Boedecker, & Hügle, 2020). As a subfield of artificial intelligence, machine learning has drawn a great deal of attention in a broad range of industries and the food industry is no exception. Recent machine learning algorithms are extensively available for many purposes including regression, classification, clustering, and so on. Specifically, the tasks of regression and classification have been more prominent with the increasing complexity and heterogeneity of data. In the area of food science, Mezgec & Koroušić Seljak (2017) utilized deep learning-based approaches for food dietary assessment. In addition, machine learning methods were applied in order to perform the authentication of foods (Jiménez-Carvelo, González-Casado, Bagur-González, & Cuadros-Rodríguez, 2019), as well as to estimate wheat hardness (Erkinbaev, Derksen, & Paliwal, 2019), and wheat grain classes (Choudhary, Mahesh, Paliwal, & Jayas, 2009) using non-destructive hyperspectral imaging. However, fundamental information on the application of machine learning to food systems, more specifically, wheat-based food products is very limited to our best knowledge.
